People respond to incentives

An incentive is simply the way to get humans to do more of a good thing and less of a bad thing.
EXAMPLES OF INCENTIVES
----------------------
burn finger on induction stove
eat vegetables for one week - go to toy shop
straight As from school - new bike
pick your nose - ridiculed
make it to the basketball team - move up the social ladder
break curfew - grounded
ace your sat - good college
flunk law school - work in your father's insurance company
do so well that a rival company comes calling - no longer have to work under your father as you are promoted to vice president
if you get excited about the promotion and drive home too fast - fined a 100 bucks for speeding
but if you do so well as to collect a year end bonus you don't care and can buy a comprehensive induction stove range that your daughter can burn her finger on.
Steel maker belches too much smoke into the air, fined for every metric ton of pollutants above the limit per day.


Day care in Haifa, Israel
BACK TO THE DAY CARE IN HAIFA ISRAEL
------------------------------------
There were 10 late pickups as the day care ended at 4 pm.
This means there were some anxious children and at least one teacher who had to stay late to take care of the anxious children.
So they introduced a fine of 3 dollars. Which amounted to 60 dollars a month for late pick-ups.
Late pickups nearly doubled to 18 pickups per month.

When the fine was stopped, the rates did not reduce.

A monetary fine meanth that parents felt no guilt, could be late. When the fine was taken away, the parents could arrive late, feel no guilt AND pay no money.

BLOOD DONATIONS
---------------
Sometimes moral incentives can be more powerful than economic ones.
When people were introduced to a 5 dollar stipend for donating blood, the number of blood donations decreased.
People found that they were no longer performing a noble act. They were instead thinking of the act of donating blood as a way to make a little bit of cash. The moral incentive was no longer there. Hence they didn't care about the 5 measly dollars.
However that doesn't mean that there are no cheaters. The human who doesn't cheat is becoming increasingly rare.
Consider what would happen if the economic incentive or stipend for blood donation was increased to 500 or even 5000 dollars, people would kill for blood, use fake IDs to donate blood more than the stipulated amount per individual per day or bring in pig's blood and pass it off as human.

WAYS PEOPLE CHEAT
------------------
You may say that you never cheat. But there are ways you cheat.
1. Getting your golf ball of the lie
2. Pill popping ball players
3. Perk abusing politicians
4. Inside trading CEOs
5. Not putting a dollar in the office piggy bank when you take a bagel. Promising yourself you'll put two next time and not doing so when you take the second bagel too.
6. Cheating at board games.
7. Waitress who pockets her tips instead of pooling them.
8. Walmart manager who shaves his sub-ordinates working hours to make his look acceptable or better.
9. 3rd grader who copies the kid whose sitting next to him in order to make it to the fourth grade.

SOME EXAMPLE OF THE THREE TYPES OF INCENTIVES
---------------------------------------------
1. Cigarettes
  a. Economic incentive - 3 dollar sin tax
  b. Social incentive - no smoking in restaurants or bars
  c. Moral incentive - the government saying terrorists sell cigarettes in the black market to fund their operations

2. Murder
  a. Economic incentive - lose your job, your house, your money, your possessions and go to prison.
  b. Moral incentive - All religions say murder is wrong
  c. Social incentive - Don't want to be looked by others as a murderer.

These incentives work very well. Murder rates dropped by about a 50 per 100000 people to about 1 from the 19th century to the 21st.

Cigarettes are no longer as widely accepted or used as they were.

THE LARGEST KIDNAPPING IN AMERICAN HISTORY
------------------------------------------
One spring evening in 1987, 7 million children disappeared.
Hardly, it was a change statistically speaking in the income tax filings.
On the night of April 15th, the IRS asked people not only to furnish the name of their children for tax exemptions in their income tax filings as they had been doing but also to provide their social security number.
Nearly one in ten dependant children disappeared.
In other words, American parents had fabricated fake children in order to get more tax exemptions.

So the waitress, the walmart manager and the 3rd grade student all cheated. But does that mean that teachers don't cheat? What about the 3rd grade student's teacher?

DO SCHOOL TEACHERS CHEAT - HIGH STAKES TESTING
----------------------------------------------
High stakes testing basically means that schools teachers and adminstrators are held accountable for low performances from their students and rewarded for high performances. Schools can be sanctioned or have more money awarded to them based on their performance. A school may be shut down and its teachers fired if they don't give a good performance on standardized year end tests. Bush in 2002 announced high stakes testing with his "No child left behind" policy. But it existed as far back as 1996 when the 400000 students in the Chicago Public Schools division complied with standardized testing. The question is given these incentives, will a teacher cheat on these tests? Faced with bad reading scores, a school may be faced with probation or even closed down. Its staff to be dismissed or re-assigned. 